# Behavioral Design Patterns

Behavioral patterns control communication and the assignment of responsibilities between different objects.

## Chain of Responsibility Pattern (COR)

The Chain of Responsibility passes requests along a chain of handlers. Each handler decides either to process the request or to pass it to the next handler in the chain.

For this pattern we could use the same exact example as before, as middlewares in Express are somehow handlers that either process a request or pass it to the next handler.

At each step a different entity is in charge of performing an action, and the information only gets passed to another entity if a certain condition is met.

### Example:

The code demonstrates an elegant solution to a money dispensing machine problem. Say, a customer requires $247 from an ATM machine. What is the combination of bank notes ($100, $50, $20, $10, $5, $1) that satisfies that request?

A Request is created with the amount requested. Next, a series of get calls are chained together, each one handling a particular denomination. Each handler determines the number of bank notes dispensed and substracts this amount from the remaining amount. The request object is passed through the chain by returning this in the get method.

~~~js

var Request = function (amount) {
    this.amount = amount;
    console.log("Requested: $" + amount + "\n");
}

Request.prototype = {
    get: function (bill) {
        var count = Math.floor(this.amount / bill);
        this.amount -= count * bill;
        console.log("Dispense " + count + " $" + bill + " bills");
        return this;
    }
}
function run() {
    var request = new Request(378);

    request.get(100).get(50).get(20).get(10).get(5).get(1);
}

~~~

## Iterator Pattern

The iterator is used to traverse elements of a collection. This might sound trivial in programming languages used nowadays, but this wasn't always the case.

Anyway, any of the JavaScript built in functions we have at our disposal to iterate over data structures (for, forEach, for...of, for...in, map, reduce, filter, and so on) are examples of the iterator pattern.

Same as any traversing algorithm we code to iterate through more complex data structures like trees or graphs.

## Observer Pattern (Event listener)

The observer pattern lets you define a subscription mechanism to notify multiple objects about any events that happen to the object they’re observing. Basically, it's like having an event listener on a given object, and when that object performs the action we're listening for, we do something.

### Example:

The Click object represents the Subject. The clickHandler function is the subscribing Observer. This handler subscribes, unsubscribes, and then subscribes itself while events are firing. It gets notified only of events #1 and #3.

Notice that the fire method accepts two arguments. The first one has details about the event and the second one is the context, that is, the this value for when the eventhandlers are called. If no context is provided this will be bound to the global object (window).

~~~js

function Click() {
    this.handlers = [];  // observers
}

Click.prototype = {

    subscribe: function (fn) {
        this.handlers.push(fn);
    },

    unsubscribe: function (fn) {
        this.handlers = this.handlers.filter(
            function (item) {
                if (item !== fn) {
                    return item;
                }
            }
        );
    },

    fire: function (o, thisObj) {
        var scope = thisObj || window;
        this.handlers.forEach(function (item) {
            item.call(scope, o);
        });
    }
}

function run() {

    var clickHandler = function (item) {
        console.log("fired: " + item);
    };

    var click = new Click();

    click.subscribe(clickHandler);
    click.fire('event #1');
    click.unsubscribe(clickHandler);
    click.fire('event #2');
    click.subscribe(clickHandler);
    click.fire('event #3');
}
~~~